# Columbia and the Cost of Rigid Organizational Structures

As an aspiring astronaut, my eight-year-old self looked to Kalpana Chawla, who tragically died aboard the Columbia, as both an inspiration and a reminder of the dangers of space-travel. In writing this, I have gained a more thorough understanding of what went wrong and a deeper appreciation for the trust astronauts place in the hands of engineers and ground control.

## The Accident 
The 28th mission of the 22-year-old space shuttle Columbia was originally scheduled for May 2000. After 18 separate delays it finally launched on 16th January 2003. A 750g piece of insulating foam came off the external fuel tank 81.7 seconds after lift-off, and struck  the shuttle's left wing at 800kmph. It gouged a 40cm hole in the gray carbon tiles that shrouded the leading edge of the aluminum wing to protect it from the extreme heat generated during the shuttle’s return to the earth. The seriousness of the problem was not comprehended by NASA mission control. Therefore they neither addressed the problem nor alerted the crew aboard the shuttle. After completing its 16-day mission, the shuttle descended back to Earth on 1st February at hypersonic speeds through the atmosphere. The astronauts remained blissfully ignorant of their impending deaths until seconds before the shuttle disintegrated 60km above Texas. 

When the Apollo program ended in 1972, so did NASA’s lofty ambitions for manned space-travel. Its reward for a successful lunar program was reduced funding in the 1970s towards more practical, closer-to-earth programs. The Space Shuttle was born.
The Shuttle fleet was to be a safe, reliable workhorse, making weekly round trips, at ten million dollars each, displacing disposable rockets and practically paying for itself by doing jobs like putting commercial satellites into orbit. Instead, thirty years later it was averaging five trips a year at half-a-billion dollars apiece. Its on-board experiments did little to advance science and it was increasingly a ferry for the ISS. The breathtaking repair of the Hubble Telescope notwithstanding, the space shuttle was a flop. After three years of delays with the Columbia, NASA wanted to carry out this routine mission at the earliest in 2003.

## Strategic Drift 
Success in the 1990s meant being faster, better and cheaper. Strategy is about choosing what to be and accepting the associated tradeoffs. Space vehicles could neither ride Moore’s Law nor economically benefit from mass-production. NASA defaulted to running the Space Shuttle like a mature business; with a tight rein over cost and schedule. In 2001 Sean O’Keefe, a Washington budget specialist, was appointed NASA Administrator.

NASA’s focus on time and cost degraded its information-processing and decision-making. A fixation on schedule meant delays became career-limiters. Institutional incentives led to neglect of ambiguous information, underestimation of safety risks, and overestimation of delay costs [1]. Decision makers have to balance conflicting goals, and make judgment calls with limited resources, time, and information. NASA’s leadership was trying to preserve the shuttle program and by extension NASA itself, long after the space-race euphoria of the Cold War.

Even to jaded air travelers, the 737-MAX plane crashes were cruel reminders of the risks inherent in complex systems. A space shuttle resembles a 737-sized plane that lifts off vertically and orbits the earth at 28,000kmph upside-down and tail-first.
Just like scaling Mt. Everest, getting into space is only half the journey. The climbdown from orbit to Florida is perilous. As the space shuttle hurtles towards the earth at hypersonic speed, it experiences searing heat during reentry. Reinforced gray carbon tiles insulate the aluminum wings which would otherwise melt away in seconds upon reentry.

When complex systems become successful, complacency can set in. NASA relied on redundancy of personnel and technology to increase reliability. Independent redundancy becomes overhead. But redundancy without independence creates an illusion of safety. Tragedy first struck with the Challenger in 1987. When Christa McAuliffe, America’s teacher-in-space on the Challenger, was asked about her nervousness, she said what she had heard: the shuttle was as safe as an airliner, when in fact it was a developmental vehicle [2].

The Challenger and Columbia accidents differed superficially. One occurred at liftoff, the other on reentry. However, leading to both accidents was a slippery slope of wishing away risks by repeatedly normalizing technical anomalies [3]. NASA did not comprehend the cultural lapses leading to the Challenger explosion. The “institutional practices that were in effect at the time of the Challenger – such as inadequate concern over deviations, a silent safety programme, and schedule pressure – had returned to NASA” [4].

## Lost in Translation
Foam-debris had been striking shuttle heat tiles after lift-off since the beginning. Engineers were worried about potential damage to the thermal armor. Most launches had popcorn-sized foam impacts that did not seem to affect the flight. Over time, the frequency of foam strikes was sufficiently high as to be dismissed. In NASA’s schedule-focussed culture, “safety of flight,” became a bar to be cleared, so the problem remained unaddressed. 
At the base of NASA’s Safety Pyramid are the numerous near-misses, on which rest layers of fewer, but more serious accidents with occasional disasters at the apex. The pyramid however, is really an iceberg; the gradual build up of near-misses and minor accidents stays hidden but eventually there is more of the apex to see.
In 1988, cameras caught a foam hit on the Atlantis, 85 seconds after liftoff, nearly exactly when the Columbia strike occurred. To the crew it looked like “it had been blasted by a shotgun”. In 2002, the Atlantis suffered another foam-hit from a part of the external tank known as the bipod ramp. That too went unaddressed. The shuttle program was gradually sliding into higher risk-levels while NASA grew more preoccupied with schedule & cost (“prove that it is unsafe”) rather than failure (“prove that it is safe”)[4]. 

Columbia’s chunk of foam came off its external fuel tank’s bipolar ramp. But rather than hitting the more fragile (but less critical) white or black tiles, the foam struck the reinforced gray tiles on the leading edge of the wing. These tiles, which bear the brunt of the reentry plasma, were thought to be almost indestructible.
The day after liftoff, NASA's Intercenter Photo Working Group detected a foam strike. To assess potential damage to the thermal armor, they wanted satellite images of Columbia from the Pentagon. They were denied. Subsequently, a Debris Assessment Team (DAT) also requested images of the left wing. But the images never arrived. After learning of the request denial, the DAT Co-Chair wrote a protest email. But he stopped himself from sending it [5]. In a truly “open-door”culture concerns are actively sought, not merely expected to be heard.
The tone at the top was of denial. Linda Ham, a rising star at NASA known for her decisiveness, quickly concluded that since foam-strikes were a known non-problem, images were unnecessary.  Without the images, the DAT could only use computer simulations to guess that the Columbia would suffer heat damage on re-entry. They couldn't know how much.
Even in the last minutes of Columbia’s existence, as its instrumentation began to fail, the vulnerability of the left wing was still not comprehended by Mission Control. O’Keefe ridiculed those inquiring about the foam as “foamologists.” Still in denial-mode, NASA bizarrely constituted an internal mishap investigation team that included Linda Ham and other decision makers in this tragedy! [6]

## Overarching Lessons 
Columbia’s destruction was caused by an ambiguous event in an experimental technology deployed for a risky mission. A developmental vehicle was mischaracterized as “operational” in a schedule-constrained environment. 
The instincts of the IPWG and the quick convening of an ad hoc DAT were remarkable.  But they lacked sufficient authority and access to resources. Communication was forced along rigid, formal channels when the need was for nimble, informal ones. Information was filtered such that crucial details were lost or misunderstood by the leadership.


[citations]
[1] Blount, S., et al. “Coping with Temporal Uncertainty: When Rigid, Ambitious Deadlines Don’t Make Sense.” In W. Starbuck and M. Farjoun (eds.), Organization at the Limit: Lessons from the Columbia Disaster. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2005, pp. 122-139.
[2] Broad, W. J. “Experts Fault NASA for Boasting of Safer Shuttle.” The New York Times, 11 Feb. 1998. https://www.nytimes.com/1998/02/11/us/experts-fault-nasa-for-boasting-of-safer-shuttle.html
[3] Vaughan, D. “System Effects: On Slippery Slopes, Repeating Negative Patterns, and Learning from Mistakes?” In W. Starbuck and M. Farjoun (eds.), Organization at the Limit: Lessons from the Columbia Disaster. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2005, pp. 41-59. https://raghavan.usc.edu/2020-fall-computing-and-global-change/vaughan.pdf
[4] Columbia Accident Investigation Board. Report of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, vol. 1. 2003, pp. 101, 127, 169. https://ehss.energy.gov/deprep/archive/documents/0308_caib_report_volume1.pdf
[5] Langewiesche, W. “Columbia’s Last Flight.” The Atlantic, Nov. 2003. https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2003/11/columbias-last-flight/304204/
[6] Smith, R. J. “NASA Culture, Columbia Probers Still Miles Apart.” The Washington Post, 22 Aug. 2003. https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2003/08/22/nasa-culture-columbia-probers-still-miles-apart/ba529afd-410b-492c-9682-39c41664712a/