# A Hope and a Prayer

{dc}I don’t think we know exactly when it first began. It was hidden in plain sight for so long. But we know it could have happened only slowly and not suddenly. A lucky section of humanity, supersmart and highly educated, found itself in a self-reinforcing feedback loop of prosperity, knowledge and technology. This subset of humans slowly broke itself away from the rest of us socially, and therefore biologically. They inter-bred exclusively amongst themselves for many generations until they became different from us. So different from us - whom they gratefully refer to as Homo sapiens but in a tone that is sometimes mocking and at other times condescending - that they now call themselves _Homo extraordinaire_.

They certainly arose from us but drifted so far away over time that now our genes no longer speak the same language. I am told that we can’t produce offsprings that will reunite us biologically. I find that difficult to accept, given all the things that the extraordinaires, as much superior to us in intelligence as we are to chimpanzees and bonobos, have been able to achieve by overcoming the barriers of nature. Maybe they don’t really want to. Why would they? What could sapien genes offer the extraordinaires? Style, perhaps. I think we’ve got way more style than them. But the bonobos must think that way about us too.

The bulged heads of the extraordinaires are supported by impossibly skinny and spindly bodies hidden under an armor of hardware that augments them both physically and mentally. We sapiens are not sure exactly where the body of a Homo extraordinaire ends and its synthetic appendages begin. The extraordinaire communicate with each other tersely in staccato bursts. Those convey what must be dense mathematical expressions that condense a volume of sapien words into a short crackle. They can decode all our languages but find human speech excruciatingly cumbersome and insubstantial to warrant real-time, interactive communication. 

Embedded in their armor is a device that allows the extraordinaires, via optoelectronics or some technology I don’t really understand, to immersively experience Martian landscapes and other distant, forbidding environments from the comfort of their homes. That device is incompatible with sapien physiology. But what we can use is what I am wearing right now. It is a contraption that extraordinaire primatologists have made for sapiens; a mesh-like gown with a hoodie hairnet that directly captures my thoughts and emotions and what those do to my body. When this data is run through what we are told is an Empathizer, the extraordinaires claim that sapien thoughts and feelings become as vivid and palpable to them as the oceans of Europa. I have submitted myself to this dog collar of sorts because I suppose I had to. The extraordinaires intend to disseminate my thoughts in sapien language, which is why you, if you are a sapien, are now reading what I am thinking. 

And if you are an extraordinaire, I know that you think that you are experiencing my utter helplessness and humiliation. I doubt it even if you are one of those who claim to really understand us. We too have had primatologists amongst us make such assertions about other primates. Ours also have a history of using the connection between sapiens and  primates to justify dominant behaviors in sapien society as being "natural" [1]. We know that the way a baboon society appears to a primatologist depends on what is being looked at, and therefore who is looking. Sapien primatology focused on male baboons [2] until female primatologists started making field observations [3]. Does sapien society look different, depending on whether you’re a male or female extraordinaire studying us? 

Come to think of it, while we used our similarities with bonobos and chimpanzees to justify inequality amongst us, we used our differences with them to position ourselves far up and above them and our other primate relatives. It’s long been a sapien thing to highlight differences, both amongst us or with other  animals, whenever we have a score to settle or an urge to dominate. Because our physical similarities to animals were too many to wish away, we focussed on mental states. We claimed that the fineness of our emotions distinguished us from other animals. All this hairsplitting got ever more difficult as we discovered that animals could do one thing after another that we thought were uniquely human. Whenever our assumptions became tenuous we would fall back on our facility for language. And most regrettably, our superior intelligence. 

The concept of humans above and separate from the animal kingdom need not have arisen. Several human traditions, firmly placed humans with other animals in an interconnected web of life. But other beliefs came to dominate humanity as they swept across much of the world. Backed by military might, they overwhelmed native belief systems and defined new human attitudes towards other living beings. Backed by God’s writ, Man was at the apex in the ladder of life and other animals subordinated to serve his dominion. The rise of western science was initially of little help to a self-serving Cartesian I-think-therefore-I-am mindset. When Carl Linnaeus published the first edition of Systema Naturae in 1735, he classified humans and apes in different genera—the former in Homo and the latter in Simi. By the tenth edition, in 1758, he found himself compelled  to included both Homo sapiens and Homo sylvestris orang-outang under the Homo genus, despite the opposition of naturalists like Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon, who maintained that God had created a hierarchy of discrete species with humans on top. Despite our similar anatomy, he argued that apes could neither speak nor walk upright for long. because they were not “governed by a superior principle" [4]. Apes were organic matter whereas we possessed souls. In the early 19th century, the German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt recast the Western conception of nature by describing it as an interconnected living web, even as his compatriot Arthur Schopenhauer [5] began disseminating ideas about animal welfare enshrined in Hindu scriptures.

The idea that life on Earth was a succession of extinctions and rejuvenations during which organisms gradually changed form and split into distinct species had been germinating for a while. But it began being expressed clearly, fully and openly by among other, Alfred Russell and, most famously, Charles Darwin. The thread that runs through all of Darwin’s works is that of continuity between humans and other animals. It is implicit in his most famous work, On the Origin of Species, and explicit in The Descent of Man with its startling assertion that apes and humans were not just superficially similar but related by ancestry. He goes further in The Expressions of Emotion in Man and Animals, with its pictures of people and animals expressing different emotional states. Darwin addresses human characteristics obsessed over by people who emphasize the distinction between people and other animals. 

Darwinism created its own cultural baggage. Thomas Huxley didn't exactly help when he publicized evolution starkly, using the words of Tennyson, as 'nature red in tooth and claw' [6]. The term evolution itself came in the way as it implied that humans represented an advancement over other animals. And paradoxically, by linking humans and apes in a shared lineage, evolution created a new separation. The budding ambiguity that apes were some kind of human was nipped by the establishment of apes as species distinct from humans. This imposed a new burden of proof, beyond physical anatomy and in the realm of the intangible “mind,” on those who felt that the common biology of apes and humans necessitated a similarity of their inner lives. 

Darwin’s work coincided with the emergence of protest politics in the West. The humane treatment of animals gained the attention of those energized by issues such as women’s rights. Interestingly, in both Britain and America, the child cruelty-protection movement was an offshoot of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals [7] though that did not entirely stop scientists from speaking as if children and animals are defective adult humans, defined by the abilities they lack and we possess.

Parental care for children is widespread though varied in the animal world. A wolf suckles her pack-mate’s young whereas a sheep will suckle only her own. Primates are good adopters. It’s a widespread trait of our whole lineage. Consider the cases of human children falling into gorilla enclosures in zoos. Jambo, a silverback in a British zoo, stood guard over an unconscious five-year-old until help came [8]. Binti Jua in Chicago picked up the fallen baby, cradled him in her arms, and then carried him back to the door to give to her keepers, even while she had her own baby on her back at the time [9]. When we watch them do this we  see ourselves in them. Do the Extrordinaire experience this when they observe sapiens caring for their own young and those of other humans and non-humans?

We honored Jambo, like we do great people, with a commemorative stamp.  And yet we withheld the most basic of rights from her kind. The right to be treated as a person.  Consider U.S. law wherein all sapiens —whether they are infants or adults, comatose or otherwise —are “natural persons” fully entitled to a suite of rights protecting their well-being and freedom simply by virtue of being human. But personhood need not be synonymous with being human. All manner of nonhuman entities like corporations and rivers have been deemed to be legal persons, entitled to a narrower set of rights. But not any animal of the non-human variety. They are regarded as property like cars, homes and other things.  

What exactly did Jambo or Binti Jua lack? We know that apes too have thoughts, emotions, dreams, and a conscious experience of the world. They can recognize their reflections. They remember their past and plan for the future. They can learn to use tools by observing. They can cooperate to hunt and defend their territory. They maintain and transmit unique cultures of  tools, techniques and habitat-specific survival skills from one generation to the next. They form lifelong kinships, mourn their dead, and seek social intimacy.  They are intelligent, self-aware, autonomous individuals. The more we recognised our deep similarities, the more pressing it became to address the unresolved question of legal personhood. If an inanimate object can be a legal person, surely some of the planet’s most intelligent animals can, too. Legal personhood would protect them from abuse, imprisonment, and murder. 

Extending common-law personhood requires a great common-law case. that compels judges to radically recast existing precedent in new ways that reaffirm constitutional  principles. One such opportunity arose with an abused chimpanzee Cecilia, in Argentina. In November 2016, Argentine judge María Alejandra Mauricio passed down a ruling. She decreed that Cecilia was a “nonhuman legal person” with “inherent rights”—the first legal decision of its kind in history., which accepted that they are living, sentient beings with legal personhood [10].
Now here I am with this high tech fishnet on me, to which I am bearing my thoughts. What little I know from reading history is that exploring the past is really about understanding the present. Now consider the history of Victorian Britain, from which I recounted certain developments here. For long it was the object of historical study, far more than bigger and older civilisations like my own in India, because the British civilisation mattered and mine didn’t. That has since changed as the standing of Indians has improved and our historical actors are being recognised for their contributions. When animals emerged as subjects of historical inquiry by sapiens, it too was a recognition of their legitimacy. 

I would like to think that the extraordinaire’s investment in studying me signals their acknowledgment of sapien legitimacy. Moreover, sapien research suggests that those who support animal exploitation also tend to endorse other prejudicial views [11,12]. The extraordinaires would also know what dawned on sapiens only slowly. That to study something closely and for long is to develop a togetherness, a feeling beyond compassion that approaches love. And from which arises fury and frustration when that something is disregarded or diminished. This makes me hopeful. And so I close with this prayer:

_Om, Sarve bhavantu sukhinaḥ_  
_Sarve santu nirāmayāḥ_  
_Sarve bhadrāṇi paśyantu_  
_Mā kashchit duḥkha bhāgbhavet_  
_Oṁ Shāntiḥ, Shāntiḥ, Shāntiḥ_

May all sentient beings be comfortable,  
May they all be free of illness,  
May they all see what is auspicious,  
May no one suffer,  
Peace, Peace, Peace.

[citations]
[1] Haraway, Donna J. "Primatology Is Politics by Other Means." Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, 1984, pp. 489–524. http://www.jstor.org/stable/192523.
[2] Washburn, S. L., and I. DeVore. "The Social Life of Baboons." Scientific American, 204(6), 1961, pp. 62–71. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0661-65.
[3] Morell, Virginia. "Seeing Nature Through the Lens of Gender." Science, 260(5106), 1993. DOI: 10.1126/science.260.5106.428.
[4] Leclerc, Georges-Louis. Buffon's Natural History. Volume V (of 10), 1807.
[5] Schopenhauer, Arthur. The Basis of Morality, 1903. https://www.gutenberg.org/files/44929/44929-h/44929-h.htm.
[6] Tennyson, Lord Alfred. In Memoriam A. H. H., 1850.
[7] "The History of the RSPCA." Animal Legal & Historical Center, Michigan State University, 1972. https://www.animallaw.info/article/history-rspca.
[8] BBC News. "Jambo the gorilla commemorated on Jersey stamps." 15 Sept. 2012. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-jersey-19609964.
[9] Chicago Tribune. "20 years ago today: Brookfield Zoo gorilla helps boy who fell into habitat." 10 June 2018. https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-gorilla-saves-boy-brookfield-zoo-anniversary-20160815-story.html.
[10] AFADA. "Acción de Hábeas Corpus Presentada Por La Asociación de Funcionarios y Abogados Por Los Derechos de Los Animales." 2016. https://www.animallaw.info/case/afada-habeas-corpus-cecilia.
[11] Jackson, Lynne M. "Speciesism Predicts Prejudice Against Low-Status and Hierarchy-Attenuating Human Groups." Anthrozoös, 32:4, 2019, pp. 445–458. https://doi.org/10.1080/08927936.2019.1621514.
[12] Dhont, Kristof, Gordon Hodson, and Ana C. Leite. "The Psychology of Speciesism." Taylor & Francis, 2019. https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781351181440-3/psychology-speciesism-kristof-dhont-gordon-hodson-ana-leite-alina-salmen.