# Can Khan Academy Transform India's Public Schools?

{dc}During my childhood years, my father was a volunteer teacher at a government-run school near our apartment in Bangalore. I would plead with him to take me to his school. He never did because the classrooms were already overcrowded. He would return home hoarse after hours of trying to make himself heard, above the din of the traffic outside, to a class of sixty plus kids. When I recently asked him about his experience, he shrugged his shoulders, saying, "I don't think they learnt anything from me."

That, unfortunately, is how it is at most of India's dilapidated and understaffed public schools [1]. Nearly half of all fifth-graders in rural India cannot read at the second-grade level. Even in urban India, where the problems of rampant student and teacher absenteeism are less severe, the learning levels are dismal [2]. More than half of India's 260 million school children attend free public schools run by the government [3]. While policies promoting school enrollment have improved literacy rates four-fold over the past seventy years [4], one out of every three illiterate people in the world is still an Indian [5]. Ultimately, rising school enrollments are not yielding commensurate learning outcomes. Ironically, the poor learning outcomes have arisen from India's success in improving literacy by getting more children to attend school. Neither the curriculum nor its teaching has been properly adapted to account for the large influx of poor, first-generation students.

This problem is urgent because thirty percent of India's population is under fourteen years of age. India's working age population will peak in a decade from now [6]. India's prosperity hinges on its ability to educate its children now so that they can find productive employment when they reach working age. This "demographic dividend," where a country leapfrogs economically when its working age population exceeds that of its children and elderly citizens, is vital for India which presently has the most number of unemployed people in the world [7].

Many hurdles stand in the way of effective public schooling in India, including basic utilities and sanitation. Two, in particular, directly relate to the actual teaching itself. One is an acute scarcity of qualified teachers [8], especially for mathematics and science, subjects that are critical for better paying jobs [9]. The other is a wide disparity in student competency within a class, that is straining overburdened teaching resources [10]. Increasingly, human resource constraints are being overcome with software automation. Can the free e-learning platform Khan Academy, by addressing these two problems, transform India's public schools and deliver a quality education (and thus a ticket out of poverty) for millions of Indians?

India's education problem seems insurmountable. As we will see, the centuries-old problem of starvation in India also seemed insurmountable until the Green Revolution of the mid-sixties. What can we learn from that transformation which, enabled by foreign expertise, ended widespread hunger in India? Tracing the history of literacy and hunger in India lets us see their connection and discover the motivating parallels that the Green Revolution offers, for how Khan Academy may help bring about a revolution in India's public schools.

It is a cruel irony that India, one of the world's great civilizations, ended up being one of the least literate. Between the third and fifth century BC, two triumphs of human intellect arose in two different worlds. In Greece, Euclid's Elements created the bedrock for geometry as we know it. In India, Pānini's Aṣṭādhyāyī laid the foundation of linguistics.  Both Euclid and Pānini used fundamentally similar methods. Yet, the cultures they belonged to evolved very differently.

While the rapid growth of written texts in ancient Greece transformed it from almost complete illiteracy to widespread literacy within two centuries, India appears to have not made such a transition. My forefathers instead shifted from oral to Vedic memorization using special techniques that ensured no syllable of a text committed to memory was lost or altered [11]. It was a method without known parallels when one considers the voluminous nature of ancient Indian literature.  The epic Mahabharata is nearly ten times as long as The Iliad and The Odyssey combined. Writing was seen as a hindrance rather than help in recitation. Even with a work as complex as Aṣṭādhyāyī, historians doubt whether Pānini used any writing at all [12].

The succeeding centuries did give rise to great universities with large libraries in Nalanda and elsewhere. But extensive gaps in historical records make it difficult to explain this transition. Or why two thousand years after Pānini, despite a long tradition of scholarship spanning the humanities, mathematics, and the natural sciences, only one in twenty Indians could read at the start of the twentieth century.

The other defining characteristic of India when the twentieth century began was starvation. Droughts visited ancient India periodically, as they did other parts of the world. There is historical evidence of prudent drought management; none about widespread famine.
Large scale famines began with the British conquest in 1757. Before the century ended, an estimated twenty one million people died in two separate famines. There were twenty famines between 1860 and 1909 [13].
A watershed event occurred in the middle of the Second World War when an estimated five million people died without a shot being fired.  They fell to the Bengal Famine of 1943. A rice shortage, exacerbated by the fall of Burma to Japan, was transformed into a colossal calamity by Winston Churchill's callous diversion of available food to British and American troops [14]. India's Independence Movement now saw freedom from British Rule not merely as an end in itself but as an urgent prerequisite for ending starvation [15].

India's problems of hunger did not end with the birth of a free nation in 1947. But famines did. As the economist Amartya Sen has famously explained, democracies do not experience famines because public accountability forces an effective response [16]. However, the messiness of democracy often gets in the way of generating sufficient measures to less calamitous challenges. So it was for the Indian republic during its infancy.  Deaths from starvation persisted, albeit on a much smaller scale. Clumsy but expedient compromises were struck between those who wanted to spread a small food pie more equitably and those who wanted to enlarge that pie. Alongside investments in irrigation, fertilizer plants and agricultural research, political compulsions also drove rationing, diet modification and fasting campaigns [15].

In 1949, India's prime minister visited farms in the American Midwest and returned impressed by western methods but unconvinced that such investments were possible by an almost insolvent India.  During its two centuries of misrule, Britain had drained out $45 trillion (in current terms) from India [17]. India's diplomats steadily increased their requests for international food aid. The pleas to the U.S. alone rose to an alarming 6 million tons of wheat [18]. At the end of the 1950s, there would be eighty million more mouths to feed than at the beginning [15]. India was turning into a Malthusian nightmare.
Fearing that democratic India's "staggering, appalling poverty" risked a communist takeover [19] in 1952 the Ford Foundation opened its first international office in New Delhi. The Rockefeller Foundation was more cautious. Before it could commit itself, extensive study was essential. "A nibbling policy is absolutely no good," it said, "because India is too vast and complex to be tackled this way" [20].

Food and education have long been the target of international aid, both by governments and private philanthropy. Such efforts often have a trajectory that is sadly familiar to Silicon Valley. An exciting new development idea comes into vogue with spectacular results from a trial. This is followed by an influx of donor money, rapid implementation of the concept in many locations, and then failure.
When researchers wanted to test ideas for improving education in poor, rural districts of Kenya in the 1990s, they zeroed in on distributing free textbooks. With only one textbook available per seventeen children, this seemed like an obvious idea. They conducted painstaking trials, akin to those for new medicines, and discovered that free textbooks made no real difference [21]. Another group tested a less expensive idea of deworming school children. Stomach worms, which sap nutrition and cause illness ranging from anemia to stunting, were widespread in eastern Africa. The results were strongly in favor of the 30-cent deworming pill [22]. The trial quickly turned into a major global initiative.

Years later, reviews of projects spanning several countries concluded that deworming had no lasting effect on school performance [23,24]. Ironically, other studies found that free textbooks were actually effective in places like Nicaragua and the Philippines [25]. The idea probably flopped in Kenya because the free textbooks were in English, which is not the mother tongue for most Kenyans. Or the textbooks were not written at the right level. It is enchanting to believe that once an idea succeeds in one place it can be scaled up like a mobile app. In reality, other confounding factors conspire with or against the idea. The Rockefeller approach of extensive study that resisted the urge for a "nibbling policy" seems prescient.

Moreover, poverty in society exists as an interacting constituent in a complex adaptive system. A vast slum colony separates the apartment block where my maternal grandparents live, from Mumbai's international airport. The slum children drop out of school to support their families by scavenging scrap. Many attend school only at the start of the school year to gather the freebies handed out so that they can sell those and return to work [26]. It's the sort of unintended consequence that exasperates aid-providers; recipients becoming their own worst enemies. It serves as a sobering reminder that improving lives is fraught with pitfalls. Behaviors that seem perverse to outsiders usually have their own internal logic. Acknowledging this should lead not to despair but resilience and nimbleness.

{dc} In 1953, noting the success of the Rockefeller Foundation with maize in Mexico under the direction of an American agronomist Norman Borlaug, India attempted similar trials with wheat, a staple of northern India [15]. While those failed, the Ford Foundation projected a staggering shortage of twenty million tons of grain by 1970. Their experts saw a need for drastic changes across the board. A so-called package program was developed with Indian agronomists and administrators that included economic incentives for farmers, intensified irrigation, improved strains of crops, and chemical fertilizers. Farmers were far more enthusiastic about irrigation than fertilizers.

In the early '60s, budgetary increases for agriculture coincided with consecutive monsoon failures. In 1965, a new Prime Minister, facing a looming food shortage and war with Pakistan, coined the slogan Jai Jawan Jai Kisan ("Hail the Soldier, Hail the Farmer") that caught the popular imagination and was celebrated in the iconic Bollywood song, Mere Desh Ki Dharti [27].
After five years the success of the package program was unclear. As with free textbooks and deworming, there was much variability in farming results. Amidst turf fights and finger-pointing, 'optimistic voices suggested that the problem lay not in the plan, but in its execution.' [15]. Moreover, the best varieties of wheat and rice crops used in the trials yielded only about a quarter more than their unimproved counterparts. In these trial varieties, as yields increased so did the height of the crops. But, beyond a point the stalks would droop, spoiling the harvest. In 1963 an Indian scientist, M.S. Swaminathan, began working with Borlaug's wheat program in Mexico.

By cross-breeding two hundred different strains, Borlaug had made the wheat more resistant to disease [28]. Then he looked for ways to grow this wheat intensively using fertilizers and irrigation. In most crops, soil nutrients and water are wasted in growing tall and leafy. Using Japanese hybrids, Borlaug transformed a tall and long-maturing crop into one that was short but produced more grain and matured quickly. Being stubby enabled the stalks to hold up more grain without drooping.

Swaminathan's wheat trials, using Borlaug's seeds, began with a few bags and grew to several thousand tons [15]. For rice, the other staple, Swaminathan tested dwarf varieties obtained by crossbreeding Taiwanese and Indonesian strains. When cooked, rice had to meet Indian sensibilities for taste. And also texture, since Indians eat with their fingers. Hybrid wheat was rumored to not taste as good and cause illness [29]. To convince skeptics, the Agriculture Minister turned the beloved cricket pitch in his backyard into a wheat patch. The new dwarf variety had a short, erect stalk that held several heads all packed with grain.

In the early 1960s, Indian farms looked the way they appear in Mere Desh Ki Dharti. The fields are tilled by oxen and harvested with sickles. The crops rise shoulder high just as they do in Pieter Bruegel's The Corn Harvest, a painting from the Middle Ages. Those scenes began disappearing from the landscape even as they were being celebrated on celluloid. Within a decade, Indian wheat fields would grow only half as high. Yields began increasing so rapidly in the late '60s that, during harvest time, schools had to be closed for use as granaries. Government credit and support prices funded tractors and harvesters that began replacing oxen and sickles. By 1970 the average wheat field was yielding twice as much grain as it did a decade ago (it is now up five-fold). "Indians who had subsisted on barely a meal a day, were now having two or even three" [15]. India turned into a food exporter and was a donor during the 1984 famine in Ethiopia.

This rapid rise in farm output within a few years makes the Green Revolution now seem like an epiphany.  "As if overnight," said Science News [30]. In reality, it was a multi-decade transformation that drew upon diverse ideas and institutions, economic policies, road and canal infrastructure, and skillful implementation by tenacious individuals who overcame critics and setbacks. India could have neither "nibbled" its way to food sufficiency nor could the hybrid grains alone have had a big impact across a subcontinent any more than deworming pills or free textbooks.

The Green Revolution exposed the underlying link between illiteracy and hunger by enabling a large increase in school enrollment. Encouraged by the results of local, social workers in Madras during the 1920s, the government of that state had begun a midday school meal program in the 1950s [31]. But scarce food and funding had limited its scope and kept it reliant on private charity. The Green Revolution enabled a rapid expansion of the meal program nationwide and helped lift literacy rates from one in five in 1951 to two in three by 2001 [32]. Midday meals in Indian government schools now enjoy a legal backing similar to the National School Lunch Act in the U.S. India is now four-fifths literate. But the fifth left behind is as large the combined populations of Germany, Britain and France. And many more are too poorly educated to work in the industrial and service sectors.

As with agriculture in the fifties, Indian democracy has struggled to measure up to the education challenge. Public spending on education, as a fraction of total government spending, is a third lower than in comparable nations like Indonesia, South Africa and Mexico [33]. Even the urban poor are losing faith in government schools. Sharanamma, who works as a house maid in my neighborhood, moved her daughter from a free government school to a private school. The tuition takes a chunk out of her modest earnings. But she feels that "it will at least be better" than the government school [34].

"Especially for English," Sharanamma adds. Access to better jobs in India often requires some English proficiency.  A 2017 Bollywood release, Hindi Medium, touchingly satirized this trend towards English and became a sleeper hit. For four years I taught English to the custodial staff at my school, mostly so that they could help their children with their school work.
The school that I attended was private, English medium, and far better resourced than any government-run school. Having used Khan Academy regularly at home to augment my schooling, I am a fan of the platform. But here I am hoping to understand its potential for those who are from the opposite end of the socioeconomic spectrum. How can Khan Academy help poor Indian students from illiterate or barely literate families?

{dc}Khan Academy is part of a wider international movement of "e-learning" or integrating software technology into school education. In "flipped" classrooms, computers are used to teach and teachers act as interventional resources for exercises. Among the early flippers was Clintondale High School, a bottom-ranked Michigan school, in 2010. The results were spectacular in every subject [35]. American public school teachers in low-income localities welcomed flipped classrooms because it enabled them "to meet students where they are as opposed to where the curriculum says they should be" [36]. Top-ranked school districts also began flipping, but for different reasons. It cultivated self-learning skills and freed up class time for laboratory work and independent projects [37]. Many studies have found flipped classrooms to improve learning outcomes [38]; none have recorded adverse outcomes.
But there have been studies that found no significant improvement. In all these instances, the e-learning tools were provided outside the school. Some students resisted learning at home prior to class [39] or were frustrated that they couldn't ask questions immediately while watching the videos [40]. Moreover the e-learning content was the responsibility of the teachers themselves, who felt overwhelmed by it [41].

Overall, I can see reasons to be cautious. Most studies were of durations no longer than a typical school term or about four months. Several were as short as four weeks. Perhaps the improvements arose from the novelty of approach for students, which would eventually wear off. Or teachers in flipped classrooms were more enthusiastic, investing more time and effort, and thereby biasing the results.

Khan Academy's origins are as geographically distant from India as Borlaug's work in Mexico. It began with its founder Salman Khan trying to help his young cousin, a student in an American school, with math lessons over the internet [42].  Khan Academy could do for Indian education what Borlaug's wheat did for Indian farming, and lift poverty-stricken children, whose families are trapped in menial jobs, to more prosperous employment. While helping Mexican agriculture, Rockefeller's program never lost sight of its larger, worldwide goal, with India as a significant test case.  Khan Academy's mission "to provide a free, world-class education for anyone, anywhere" is no less ambitious. It is backed by the Gates Foundation and other private donors with deep pockets. Already a tenth of Khan Academy's active users, exceeding a million, are located in India.

Khan Academy's potential is being assessed around the developing world. Trials in El Salvador [43] and Sri Lanka [44] showed that Khan Academy-based math lessons yielded superior learning outcomes than conventional teaching. Khan Academy has many more users in Brazil than India because of better access to the internet as well as laptops and tablets. Yet, a randomized evaluation to measure its impact on math scores in Brazilian public schools yielded highly variable results based on the school's infrastructure and program implementation [45].

Encouragingly, in India, supplemental use of learning software has been shown to be especially helpful for weaker students in urban public schools [2,46]. Khan Academy's promise stems from its ability to overcome the two big challenges facing Indian public schools.  First, online content in mathematics and science helps combat systemic teacher shortages and learning challenges in these subjects. By reducing the teaching workload, Khan Academy can make teachers become more effective as classroom facilitators. It helps that the math and science content is less dependent on cultural context than other subjects like the social sciences, once the videos are translated. The platform can also overcome the other big challenge: variation in learning levels of students. Students can learn individually or in a small group with others who are at a similar stage. Videos can be paused and replayed to suit the pace of learning.  Thus Khan Academy can turn teachers of large classes into facilitators who fill the gaps of individual students.

Several Indian state governments have begun teaming up with Khan Academy for their public schools [47]. On its part, Khan Academy has set up an India team, combining platform expertise from overseas with local talent. The importance of school infrastructure and program implementation, seen in the Brazil study, seems to be getting due recognition.

Vipul Redey, a Stanford alumnus, has been helping Indian public schools use Khan Academy. He points to how its content has been tailored to fit Indian requirements [48]. Schools, he says, are far likelier to adopt tools that fit their present methods. He also describes teacher readiness for technology as "a rate limiting factor." Like school infrastructure, this varies considerably across India and within a state. Khan Academy's engagement with multiple states is encouragingly similar to that of the Green Revolution which had to cope with the wide diversity in infrastructure and farming practices across India.

Mathu Shalini quit the elite Indian Administrative Service to join Khan Academy as a strategist. The gaps in infrastructure "are real constraints," she admits [49]. "But that should not deter us from trying what is possible." That includes localizing the platform for low bandwidth settings and bulk downloading for offline usage [50]. Deploying video in government classrooms poses difficulties, big and small. For my visit to a government school last year, I was forewarned that they did not have a computer for making presentations. So I got my own laptop. As it turned out, the glare from the sunlight in the classroom, whose windows had no curtains, made it nearly impossible for the students to see what I was displaying on my computer screen.

Shalini describes the subtitles that appear synchronously with the audio (in several Indian languages) in Khan Academy videos as "man-plus-machine" [49]. Raw machine translation has limited pedagogical value, says Redey. "We rely on old-fashioned humans , teachers mostly, who know how to phrase explanations for comprehension and retention" [48]. The subtitles also offer an unintended benefit. They improve reading skills as students hear and read the text simultaneously [51].  Another local intervention has been the use of Hindi mingled with English terms for math and science. I can see this helping children make the aspirational transition to English more comfortably.

Khan Academy's India team seems to recognize that e-learning isn't a silver bullet any more than the high yielding grains were sixty years ago. There is a sense of wanting a comprehensive understanding of the Indian ecosystem that harks back to the development of the package program that preceded the Green Revolution. "We are still in our early years of implementing these systems and we are constantly iterating to learn what works at scale," says Shalini.  She sees self-paced learning as an ideal but "a huge shift from how a traditional classroom operates and how systems [in India] are designed" [49]. Redey also sounds cautious: "Our data shows that self-directed learners don't do as well as teacher-directed learners." He thinks that is likely because a teacher "enforcing the discipline of regular practice is able to demonstrate more growth in a student with Khan Academy" than a self-directed learner [48]. But where teaching support is sparse, Shalini says that "Khan Academy can provide a safety net to the learner."

A rap against the Green Revolution is that it did not eliminate rural poverty. The rural poor remain stuck in small, overcrowded farms because they lack the skills to migrate to other sectors, which would enable farm consolidation and improve economies of scale. In a way, Khan Academy could help finish what was left unfinished by the Green Revolution. Towards the climax of Hindi Medium, in the song Ek Jindari [52], poor kids from a government school compete successfully against their privileged counterparts. The audience within the movie cheers them on. So did the crowd in the cinema hall where I watched the film. India now seems ready for this transformation just as it was for the Green Revolution when Mere Desh ki Dharti hit the screens.

Like the Jai Jawan Jai Kisan campaign of the sixties, the Indian government has rolled out a National Education Policy (with a catchy slogan) recently. Its emphasis on digital learning and the investment that this emphasis demands (public spending on education is expected to double) dovetail with Khan Academy's work. The policy's advocacy of a gradual transition to English also fits with Khan Academy's hybrid English-Hindi content. It seems hard to imagine now that in a decade, the classrooms of government schools could look as different from the present as today's wheat fields look, compared to what Bruegel saw four centuries ago.

Covid-19 is accelerating the adoption of the platform [53], speeding up efforts to improve its effectiveness in Indian settings. Khan Academy enables asynchronous learning wherein teachers and students don't have to engage simultaneously but whenever they can access the internet. "Schools have no option," says Redey. "They are limited by their budgets and massive student populations" [48].

Covid-19 is also adding a layer of complexity much like the consecutive droughts of the sixties did for the Green Revolution. The digital divide exists both in infrastructure and the availability of devices (usually mobile phones) for remotely accessing the content, posing challenges for "designing an inclusive program," says Shalini. That includes helping teachers engage with "different subsets of students" depending on their access to the internet or even the school [49].

Seventy years ago, the food situation in India looked as hopeless as public school education does now. Incremental improvements in agriculture were then too slow for the moving demographic treadmill as they are now for education. The requirements for transformation fall into four distinct categories: Technology that is cheap and scalable (hybrid seeds then, information technology now; fertilizers then and electronic devices now); Psychology to change stakeholder attitudes (farmers-consumers then and teachers-students now); Infrastructure (roads and irrigation then; broadband now) and Facilities (moisture and pest-free granaries then; clean and safe school buildings now).  Comparing the Green Revolution with the promise of Khan Academy, the parallels become clear.

Khan Academy's mission is world-wide. But, as with Rockefeller Foundation's agriculture program, it is India and its continent-sized student population that will ultimately move its impact needle like nowhere else. Khan did not invent e-learning any more than Borlaug invented semi-dwarf hybrids.  By leveraging governments and private philanthropy, Borlaug had an impact far beyond what any individual agronomist could have imagined, and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Khan Academy too, is leveraging the central and multiple state governments in India. And it is backed by wealthy private donors. If Khan Academy can flip the fortunes of India's public schools then Salman Khan may well become the Norman Borlaug of our times.

[citations]
[1] DNA Correspondent. "Shortage of Teachers, Poor State of Schools, and Lack of Facilities Ask 'Padhega, Khelega Gujarat, Par Kaise?'" DNA India, 3 Mar. 2019.
[2] Banerjee, Abhijit, et al. "Remedying Education: Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007.
[3] NUEPA. National University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA), 2016.
[4] National Statistical Office. "Key Indicators of Household Social Consumption on Education in India." 2018.
[5] UNESCO. "Teaching and learning: achieving quality for all." EFA Global Monitoring Report, 2014.
[6] UNFPA. United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 2020.
[7] Outlook Web Bureau. "India Is The Nation Of The Most Unemployed In The World: Labour Bureau Statistics." 5 Apr. 2018.
[8] Education Desk. "Severe Shortage of Teachers in Public Schools; Most Vacant Posts in UP, Bihar: Report." The Indian Express, 25 Dec. 2018.
[9] Chettri, Shradha. "Delhi: Computer Science Teachers Will Teach Maths and Science Too." The Times of India, 1 Nov. 2019.
[10] Alcott, Benjamin, and Pauline Rose. "Learning in India's Primary Schools: How Do Disparities Widen across the Grades?" International Journal of Educational Development, vol. 56, 2017, pp. 42–51.
[11] Keay, John. "Vedic Values C1700-900 BC." India: A History, Grove Press, 2011, p. 31.
[12] Bronkhorst, Johannes. "Literacy and Rationality in Ancient India." Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 56(4), 2002, pp. 797-831.
[13] Bhatia, B.M. Food Security in South Asia. Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. New Delhi, 1985.
[14] Mukerjee, Madhushree. Churchill's Secret War: The British Empire and the Ravaging of India during World War II. Penguin Random House, 2018.
[15] Siegel, Benjamin Robert. Hungry Nation: Food, Famine, and the Making of Modern India. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[16] Sen, Amartya. "Why Democratization Is Not The Same As Westernization." The New Republic, 06 October 2003, p. 33.
[17] Chakrabarti, Shubhra, and Utsa Patnaik. "Revisiting the 'Drain', or Transfer from India to Britain in the Context of Global Diffusion of Capitalism." Tulika Books, 2018, pp. 277–317.
[18] Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. "Variation in Population since 1901", 2001.
[19] Sackley, Nicole. "Foundation in the Field: The Ford Foundation New Delhi Office and the Construction of Development Knowledge, 1951–1970." Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2012, pp. 237–238.
[20] Fosdick, Raymond B. "India," Rockefeller Foundation Records, RAC, RG 1.2, Series 460, Box 1, Folder 1. May 22, 1947.
[21] Glewwe, Paul, et al. "Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and Test Scores in Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 112-35, 2009.
[22] Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. "Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities." Econometrica 72(1): 159-217, 2004.
[23] Allen, Tim, and Melissa Parker. "Deworming Delusions? Mass Drug Administration in East African Schools." Journal of Biosocial Science, vol. 48, no. S1, 2016, pp. S116–47.
[24] Taylor-Robinson, David C., et al. "Public Health Deworming Programmes for Soil-Transmitted Helminths in Children Living in Endemic Areas." Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2019.
[25] Heyneman, Stephen, and Dean T. Jamison. "Textbooks in the Philippines: Evaluation of the Pedagogical Impact of a Nationwide Investment." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 139-150.
[26] Boo, Katherine. "Opening Night." The New Yorker, 19 June 2017.
[27] Kapoor, Mahendar. "Mere Desh Ki Dharti." Upkar, Saregama Music, 1967.
[28] Zabinski, Catherine. Amber Waves: The Extraordinary Biography of Wheat, from Wild Grass to World Megacrop. University of Chicago Press, 2020, pp. 141-161.
[29] Dubey, Shyama Charan. India's Changing Villages: Human Factors in Community Development. Routledge, 1958, pp. 157-63.
[30] Culliton, Barbara J. "Wheat and Revolution." Science News 94, no. 1 (1968), pp. 19-20.
[31] Ramakrishnan, T. "Tracing the History of Tamil Nadu's Mid-Day Meal Scheme." The Hindu, 21 Feb. 2020.
[32] India Budget 2001-02. "Literacy as seen in the 2001 census," Section 10.32 and Table 10.13.
[33] "Share of Education in Government Expenditure." Our World in Data, 2017.
[34] Sharanamma. Interview. Conducted by Niveditha S. Iyer, 25 Oct. 2020.
[35] Rosenberg, Tina. "Turning Education Upside Down." Opinionator, 10 Oct. 2013.
[36] Butrymowicz, Sarah. "Promise of 'Flipping the Classroom' Eludes Poorer School Districts." The Hechinger Report, 30 Mar. 2020.
[37] Rao, Neil. "Flipped Teaching Encourages Students to Learn Independently." Saratoga Falcon, 2016.
[38] Schultz, David, et al. "Effects of the Flipped Classroom Model on Student Performance for Advanced Placement High School Chemistry Students." Journal of Chemical Education, vol. 91, no. 9, 2014, pp. 1334–39.
[39] DeSantis, Joshua et al. "Do Students Learn More From a Flip? An Exploration of the Efficacy of Flipped and Traditional Lessons." Journal of Interactive Learning Research, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2015.
[40] Bhagat, Kaushal Kumar et al. "The impact of the flipped classroom on mathematics concept learning in high school." Educational Technology & Society, 19(3), 2016, pp. 134–142.
[41] Chao, Chih-Yang et al. "Exploring students' learning attitude and achievement in flipped learning supported computer aided design curriculum." Computer Application in Engineering Education, 2015.
[42] Khan, Salman. The One World Schoolhouse: Education Reimagined. Hodder And Stoughton, 2012.
[43] Büchel, Konstantin et al. "Evaluation Report on the CAL-Impact Program by Consciente," 2019.
[44] Weeraratne, Bilesha, and Brian Chin. "Can Khan Academy e-learning video tutorials improve mathematics achievement in Sri Lanka?" IJEDICT Vol. 14, Issue 3, 2018, pp. 93-112.
[45] Ferman, Bruno et al. "Are Public Schools Ready to Integrate Math Classes with Khan Academy?", 2019.
[46] Muralidharan, Karthik et al. "Disrupting Education? Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India." American Economic Review, vol. 109, no. 4, Apr. 2019, pp. 1426–60.
[47] Joshi, Bharath. "Karnataka state schools may get Khan Academy lessons." Economic Times, 2016.
[48] Redey, Vipul. Email interview. Conducted by Niveditha S. Iyer, 31 Oct. and 8 Nov. 2020.
[49] Shalini, Mathu. Email interview. Conducted by Niveditha S. Iyer, 3-6 Nov. 2020.
[50] Rupeja, Neha. "Going Local." The Hindu, 17 December 2017.
[51] Kothari, Brij. "Reading Literacy for a Billion: Same Language Subtitling (SLS) Is Now National Policy." Ideas from IIMA, 2019.
[52] Sanghvi, Tanishka. "Ek Jindari." Hindi Medium, T Series, 2017.
[53] "Delhi explores partnership with Khan Academy for online classes." IANS, 07 April 2020.
