# Learning Well from Being Wrong

## The unavailability of negative and null results in science leads to wasted time and resources in experimentation. It also skews scientific theory to fit positive results and ignore what didn't work. Scientific progress will accelerate if we incentivise sharing negative results and the precise experiment configurations that generated them. While this idea is not new, previous attempts to address it with dedicated journals have struggled due to structural barriers and disincentives. This essay argues that in our new world of agent-backed science, releasing negative results is achievable and necessary and proposes an alternative approach to collecting this data.

{dc}Four years ago, as a summer research intern at a drug discovery lab, I had three months to build a pharmacokinetic prediction pipeline for small molecules. My task was to model the absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity (collectively "ADMET") of candidate drugs. ADMET is an important screening criterion for candidate compounds towards the long and expensive process of drug development.

As a beginner scientist, I had many ideas and an acute shortage of time and compute to test them. If I had a magic wand that summer, I'd seek to quickly shrink my experiment list by scouring research archives for all ideas that had been tested and their results, not just the relatively few true positives.

The reasons for sharing research failures are well understood. There is value in reporting errors that turn out to be about a system or tool ([Nature](https://www.nature.com/nature-index/news/three-reasons-to-share-your-research-science-failures)). Sharing unsuccessful work at scale saves resources by eliminating unproductive approaches for the community ([Reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/research/comments/1hty986/hot_take_journals_should_publish_failed/)). And failures improve overall understanding. After all, a theory built mostly on positive results is likely to be less complete than one that can also properly account for the failures.

Then why do negative results rarely find their way into publications? For starters, there is neither new funding nor fame in publishing them and a perceived reputational risk in making failures public. Writing clean reports that neatly explain failures takes time. And existing research journals are not positioned to handle the large volume of reported failures. Attempts through specialized journals, such as the [Journal of Negative Results](https://www.jnr-eeb.org/index.php/jnr) among others, have often failed due to difficulties in attracting submissions. While [PLOS ONE](https://collections.plos.org/collection/missing-pieces/) and [F1000Research](https://f1000research.com/) do maintain active collections for such findings, it can be challenging for researchers who must stay abreast of all the successful results in their field, to also cope with the much larger domain of failed results.


{sep}

Advances in cloud computing and agentic AI now enable the collection, storage and ingestion of datasets that far exceed human capacity. As an AI researcher, I can now use tools like [Weights & Biases](https://wandb.ai/) to track every experiment I launch and [GitHub](https://github.com/) to trace every model and code change made. Not only can I effortlessly make my negative results available, the precise experiment configuration and execution that led to the result is also auto-documented. Under the prevailing positive-result mindset, we release a final codebase snapshot devoid of all its incremental tweaks, a filtered selection of positive experiment plots and a compelling research story. Instead, we could release it all.

I propose the construction and mantainance of result database where each record is a single experiment-result pair, optionally linked to an associated paper (if one exists). Many records in this database will be negative or null results. Ambient tools will auto-log and submit every experiment to the database and impose no burden on the researcher. Instead of curating negative results as articles in designatd journals, we will mantain a simple searchable collection of experiment-result pairs. Researchers may choose to provide written analyses of their negative results in publications.

Today, for the first time, it is feasible to record and effectively consume negative results! Human researchers can outsource configuring experiment recording and tracking method changes to agents. On the consumption front too, autonomous systems can parse massive experiment records to identify, cluster and analyze prior attempts. Beyond computing and computational research, my conversations with peers in the physical and life sciences have convinced me that in due time this can extend to science as a whole.

Agentic research amplifies the need for negative results. Even when agents save us time today, we still face resource constraints on data, money, approvals and more. Without negative results to direct always-on action-biased agents, we will observe severe inefficiencies with repeated work. I also expect that the number of new observations and discoveries will increase, leading to ever more theories that explain them. However, many of these theories will fit the positive samples (à la the [Multiple Testing Problem](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4840791/)). Requiring theories to explain negative results will enforce stronger guardrails on scientific slop.

{sep}

To test the utlity of our null result collection, we will select a representative sample of computational researchers in a specific domain (e.g. drug design for a particular pathway or sparse LLM architecture design), so that researchers benefit from peer results. Over a span of three years (assuming paper life cycles span 6-18 months), the researchers will agree to use recording tools that ambiently record every experiment-result pair. We might design these tools or use existing options. We will launch and mantain the service that houses these records.

At fixed intervals, we will have this experiment group and a control group self-evaluate productivity and research novelty levels. For a "double-blind", a separate set of independent researchers will evaluate the two groups' producitivity and idea generation. Care will be taken to anonymize records to minimize bias and externalities to all participants. Finally, for the experiment group, we will record instances where researchers/agents chose not to run an experiment due to evidence of prior failure and estimate the resource savings (this can be self-reported or logged by an agent monitor). Material savings and statistically significant gains in productivity and novelty against the control group (this is especially useful when agents keep improving) should provide evidence in favor recording negative results.

Retrying "failed" science is helpful because minor method adjustments can materially change outcomes. Existing negative results might dissuade scientists from revisiting hypotheses. Luckily, since we can record the precise experiment configurations and decisions that led to the negative results, humans and agents can exercise judgement to test variations. Bad actors could fake negative results to dissuade peers from pursuing promising ideas. Here too, the exact trace of a negative result helps. Negative result collections will mantain reproducibility engines that randomly re-run submissions to surface wrongdoing and lower public credibility scores.

This new world presents new incentives. We can make recording null results painless. Then, novel discoveries will increasingly rest on both prior successes and failures (either in agent training data or what data was used for discovery). Since negative results will directly contribute to one's progress and can easliy be cited, our new works would reference both the positive and negative experiment-result pairs that influenced experiment directions. Recognising the value of both trying and succeeding in science will cement the incentives for us to share our null results and experimental failures.

[citations]
[1] "Three reasons to share your research failures." Nature Index. https://www.nature.com/nature-index/news/three-reasons-to-share-your-research-science-failures
[2] "Hot take: journals should publish failed experiments." Reddit r/research. https://www.reddit.com/r/research/comments/1hty986/hot_take_journals_should_publish_failed/
