# The Indian Ration Card

{dc}An estimated five million people died in the Bengal Famine of 1943 when a food shortage in India was transformed into a colossal calamity by Winston Churchill’s callous diversion of available stocks to Allied troops. To absolve themselves, while balancing the risk of a civilian revolt against the voracious military appetite for essential commodities, the British set up a rudimentary rationing system in India. The ration system, and the cards that were issued to people for enforcing it, also served as a symbol of their rule in India against the backdrop of their decline as a world power. The Rationing Adviser to the Government of India, H. H. Kirby spoke the paternalistic language of the colonial master when he said, “The [British] government of India is in the position of a father of a family and the provinces are all the members in it" [1]. From its necessity, to the attitude of its designers and the form it would take, the ration card’s concealed telos was to project power and maintain control.

Although identification documents were not new to Indians as colonised subjects, the rationing system was significant both in the scale of documentation produced and the enumeration that it attempted. The applications for ration cards, with its established norms for formally addressing colonial authorities, were essentially, subservient petitions [2]. The card, by turning applicants into cloying supplicants and presuming to represent an objective, written truth, became another tool for legitimizing colonial control. To appear objective and truthful, the entire process from application to granting was littered with steps of rubber-stamping, attaching or detaching counterfoils and issuance of receipts. In reality, it was a pretense by the ruler for simply achieving predetermined outcomes of control and exploitation [3]. Colonial officials interpreted rules subjectively based on expediencies such as the perceived social standing of the applicant.

Independent India initially discontinued the rationing system entirely. Mahatma Gandhi held that rationing “gave rise to fraud…and artificial scarcity while curbing individual initiative,” and further impoverished the poor [4]. However, facing chronic food deficits in the early 1950s, subsidized rations were introduced as a safety net by the Indian government for essential commodities such as cereals, sugar and cooking fuel (kerosene). The ration card became the basis for availing limited quantities of these items at subsidized prices from designated outlets. Thus, the Indian ration card was created for an entirely different objective than its British predecessor. Whereas the British-era card was for controlling the consumption of essential commodities, the Indian card had a new telos - to demonstrate the elected government’s commitment to the welfare of its citizens. A different designer seeking a different function will create a different design. Yet, as we shall see, it is often difficult to entirely erase design legacies. 

The British had issued individual ration cards on a small scale, fearing that family cards would be prone to fraud with fictitious family members and withheld deaths and departures. India adopted the family as the unit for large scale issuance. For the political leadership, the family card was more suited to the people of free India in post-war conditions. From an administrative standpoint, the family cards meant savings from fewer issuances. Moreover, a family card simplified accounting as cash memos could always be issued to the head of the family irrespective of the person buying at the store. The card now became a booklet bearing biographical details of all the resident members of the family. These benefits of adopting the family as the unit for rationed subsidies were offset by the burden of reissuance with births, deaths, migrations and return of family members. Since rations during such updates were threatened by procedural delays, families often concealed changes. In addition, fewer than one in five Indians were deemed to be literate, according to the 1951 Census [5]. Yet, the holder was nominally accountable for the family information that appeared on the card. Most beneficiaries could not even sign their name; the card carried their thumb impression, although its verifiability was questionable in many cases as the card holders were manual laborers with calloused fingers.

The Indian government turned the British-issued individual ration card into an India-issued family ration subsidy booklet. However, the term “ration card” persisted. Despite its vastly different purpose, the new card perpetuated certain problematic aspects of its colonial predecessor. As with the British rationing controls, the Indian administrative grid for stocking and distributing subsidized commodities was territorial. Ration outlets served only those who held cards with addresses that fell within their designated localities. This made the residential information on the card crucial for its holder and posed serious challenges for migrant workers and squatters. The Indian ration card, by way of the British, seemed to have inherited a characteristic of nineteenth-century Europe that sought to exclude gypsies and migrants, who were deemed to be freeloaders and undeserving of state welfare. Whereas the family-centric aspects of the card were designed to help users, its address-centric aspects prioritised easier administration over ease of use. 

Because the ration cards were issued by state governments, they differed in language and appearance, across the nation. More problematic was the differing criteria employed for their issuance. State-specific political considerations often led to a generous blurring of address with residence, especially in places with a large influx of refugees from Pakistan. Whereas, in other parts of the country, local authorities simply denied ration cards to migrants and the homeless. “A jhopadpatti (slum) is not an address. The law says ration cards can only be issued to people with real addresses,” said a rations officer [1]. In May 2020, the Indian government announced a ‘One nation, one ration card’ scheme to erase many of these inconsistencies. Looking at specimens of the British cards and Indian booklets now, it is hard not to see the printed instructions, rubber stamps and thumb impressions, all coming together to emphasize the relationships between the document, the government and the people. The Indian booklets also convey the relationships between the applicant, the family and their address, as well as that collective on one side and the subsidized commodities on the other.

The Indian ration card improved human flourishing by cementing other social relationships. Families without an economic need for subsidized supplies would lend the card to close friends, relatives, and neighbours. Even as late as the 1990s, fewer than half of India’s population had access to banking services, leaving them reliant on social relationships or usurious money lenders for credit. The ration card became an asset that got mortgaged to lenders, who would then claim rations they were not legally entitled to [6]. In many urban, middle-class homes that didn’t need the subsidy, the ration card was used by the household maids, who badly needed the subsidy but could not access it as slum dwellers.

These middle-class families nevertheless acquired ration cards for a different reason. In the absence of a driver’s license or passport (few Indians could afford a car or foreign travel), the ration card served as the de facto identity and address-proof document. After all, it was government-issued, had the relevant names, signatures or finger-prints, address and basic biographical information. However, it was never designed to serve as an identity document. The information on it was mostly handwritten in ink that smudged easily and individual identity was tied to the family. Until the 1980s, ration cards also lacked photographs. This unintended affordance of the ration card, outside its legally sanctioned use for procuring subsidized commodities, was in constant flux. At times it sought to establish the identity of a claimant, at other times it testified to the chronology of life events and at yet other times, it verified an address and its continuous occupation. In legal disputes, court rulings varied between accepting the card as primary evidence or merely as corroborating evidence [7].

During the 1980s, with growing prosperity (and the ability to travel abroad), many Indian families such as those of my parents, were able to use their family ration cards and a clutch of other documents to get passports. Over time, other identification cards, such as for income tax and voting, came into being. The ration card gradually ceased to be a proof of identity for those who didn’t need or qualify for the subsidy. Less than half of the Indian population now qualifies for subsidised rations [8].
The ration card arose out of a colonial need to maintain control without stoking popular revolts. Its telos reeked of superiority and discrimination. The card’s intended function changed from controlling consumption of colonial subjects to subsidised food supplies for the citizens of a democratic India. Yet it could not shake off some of its colonial baggage. With growing prosperity and the increasing availability of better forms of identity documents, both the uses and users of the ration card have shrunk and the card is gradually becoming a relic of a bygone era.

[citations]
[1] Sriraman, Tarangini. "A Petition-like Application? Rhetoric and Rationing Documents in Wartime Delhi, 1941–45." The Indian Economic & Social History Review, vol. 51, no. 3, 2014, pp. 163, 353–82. Crossref, doi:10.1177/0019464614536017.
[2] Raman, Bhavani. "Document Raj: Writing and Scribes in Early Colonial South India." South Asian History and Culture, vol. 5, no. 3, 2014, pp. 398–401. Crossref, doi:10.1080/19472498.2014.905331.
[3] Hull, Matthew S. "Documents and Bureaucracy." Annual Review of Anthropology, vol. 41, no. 1, 2012, pp. 251–67. Crossref, doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.012809.104953.
[4] Siegel, Benjamin Robert. Hungry Nation: Food, Famine, and the Making of Modern India. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[5] Singh, Hemant. "Census 2011: Literacy Rate and Sex Ratio in India Since 1901 to 2011." Jagranjosh.Com, 17 Oct. 2016, www.jagranjosh.com/general-knowledge/census-2011-literacy-rate-and-sex-ratio-in-india-since-1901-to-2011-1476359944-1.
[6] Gulati, Leela. "Rationing in a Peri-Urban Community, Case Study of a Squatter Habitat." Economic & Political Weekly, 12 (2), 1977, pp. 501-506.
[7] Delhi High Court, Ashok Kumar vs DDA, 10 August 2007, https://indiankanoon.org/doc/936272/. Accessed 12 Feb. 2021.
[8] Sharma, Harikishan. "Explained: What Is the 'One Nation, One Ration Card' System?" The Indian Express, 16 May 2020, indianexpress.com/article/explained/one-nation-one-ration-card-system-explained-6410179.


