# The Red Barn: A Visitor’s Diary 

{dc} In a sign of the times, my first thoughts as I cycled towards the Red Barn [1] were about Hendra, the horse equivalent of Covid that was identified in the ‘90s and killed both horses and their human handlers in Australia. I remembered the story of a Han Dynasty general who noticed that sick horses recovered from eating Plantago asiatica, and fed it with good effect to his sick troops. It’s a sobering reminder of the biological ancestry and frailty that we share with horses.

At the barn I saw horses and riders perform complex maneuvers, galloping over obstacles, moving with great speeds and broad leaps. Competitive horse-human teams will move at speeds exceeding 60 kmph. Even more marvelous than the sheer athleticism of this is that it results from a cross-species interaction between a half-ton, frisky animal and a human dangerously perched atop it who can’t physically compel the horse to act against its free will. I saw Stanford riders motivate horses to cooperate freely with them. The horses appeared as willing equals with their rider towards the common goal. Horse and rider seem united as a paired mind that bridges the vast neurological gap between an instinctively flighty, prey animal and a predator-brained human. The Red Barn equestrian facility at Stanford shares its programming and philosophy online [1]. Recent studies showing that horses can pass mirror self-recognition tasks reinforce the idea that they are active partners rather than passive machines, strengthening the trust I witnessed [2].

While a feral horse may hop over a stream for food or escape, that’s far from an equestrian feat. Humans and Horses evolved to survive completely different evolutionary pressures of natural selection. Horses were prey for the prehistoric human hunter. There are sites in France where at the base of a cliff lie a massive pile of horse bones, likely the remains of horses that were chased off the cliff by bands of humans. Like other prey animals, horse eyes are set on either side of the head for a panoramic view of the world, and their horizontal slit pupils allow clear sight along the horizon but fuzzy vision above and below. Horses are dichromats whose visual system emphasizes motion detection over chromatic detail, so they literally perceive the world differently from humans [3]. Human physiology with front-facing eyes for concentrated attention and depth perception, and a brain with a prefrontal cortex for strategy and reason are advantageous for planning and killing. It is remarkable that a horse-human team can come to trust one another and communicate through subtle touch and body language. 

It’s a journey that likely began in ice age Eurasia where, in prehistoric art, the Vogelherd horse seems to embody what we now recognize as an archetype of majesty [4], and Jeremy and Norman’s account of the sculpture in “The Earliest Sculpture of a Horse” keeps that archetype vivid [5]. When I saw the horses standing in the Red Barn, did I actually see what the Vogelherd artist saw? Highly unlikely, because present day horses are a product of the Anthropocene, selectively bred by us to shape the world exclusively for our needs. Over millennia, humans have bred horses suited for functions as varied as farming and waging war. The human on the horse is not as much a partner as a parasite mounted on its host. 

Horses have outlived their utilitarian function in our mechanized world.  Equestrian sports are ultimately the product of human demands made on horses and seem morally no better than circus acts with animals. What then should horses be for now? Or rather, what do we owe them for carrying us on their backs across continents and from prehistory to modernity?

Rewilding, the process of taking animals out of captivity and returning them to the wild, is never simple. Wild animals require extensive knowledge of their environment. Behavior may be encoded in the genes, but not the knowledge of how to survive in a region. That comes from experiential learning. Stuck in small, dusty paddocks, domesticated  animals might not even know that they need to know things or that they have to search for food and water, since it’s always been brought to them. With horses it gets harder. They are large, roaming animals needing extensive habitats with tightly knit social groups. There’s just not enough land available as what is suitable for horses is now valuable farmland in most parts of the world. Most natural reserves are wooded and therefore unsuitable for horses. The dedication of volunteers, most notably the Dutch couple Inge and Jan Bouman, that has resulted in the rewilding of the Przewalski's horse in Mongolia, is an inspiring effort in this direction [6].


## Acknowledgements

When I visited the Red Barn, I ran into Sue Barton, a volunteer at the Red Barn. She has been working with her horse, Handsome, for the past year. She has been riding horses since she was eight and has horses of her own at her stable. We spent over two hours touring the Barn and taking Handsome for his routine jog. I learnt so much from our discussion and am deeply grateful for the time Sue spent with me.


[citations]
[1] Stanford Equestrian Center. “Red Barn at Stanford University.” Accessed March 9, 2026. https://redbarn.stanford.edu/
[2] Baragli, P., Scopa, C., Maglieri, V. et al. “If horses had toes: demonstrating mirror self recognition at group level in Equus caballus.” Animal Cognition. 2021. 1099–1108, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10071-021-01502-7
[3] Carroll, J., Murphy, C. J., Neitz, M., ver Hoeve, J. N., & Neitz, J. “Photopigment basis for dichromatic color vision in the horse.” Journal of Vision, 2001. https://doi.org/10.1167/1.2.2
[4] Hahn, Joachim. Vogelherd. Oxford Art Online, 2003. 10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.T090052
[5] Vogel Horse – Jeremy, Norman. “The Earliest Sculpture of a Horse”. HistoryofInformation.com. https://www.historyofinformation.com/detail.php?entryid=3917
[6] Mongolia Tours & Travel. n.d. “Przewalski’s Horses: From Extinction to Reintroduction.” Accessed May 1, 2022. https://www.mongolian-ways.com/travel-blog/przewalskis-horses-from-extinction-to-reintroduction
